[applause]
Now, I grew up with an Irish mother in
an English [music] um household. That
really did make me question where I fit
in because well, I was definitely too
English for the Irish people. I was
also, I think, too Irish [music] for the
English people and I was also too ginger
for everybody.
My name is Professor Hannah Fry, a
mathematician and writer with a lifelong
habit of following my curiosity,
especially when things are deeply
deliciously interesting.
>> Kitchen yoga for you.
>> Dianisis would approve.
>> Some people travel [music] to see the
world. I travel to question the forces
that shape entire nations.
>> Welcome to South Korea. I wanted to come
here for their optimal urban planning.
>> It sort of feels quite chaotic. I'll be
honest with you.
>> I want to meet the people with
unexpected stories to tell. I cannot
imagine going through that as a young
boy.
>> And dig up the peculiar and wonderful
[music] treasures that reveal what a
country is made of.
I'm looking at it and thinking, "What
beautiful geometry."
[music]
>> This is my way to make sense of what
makes our world go round. [music]
Ireland. [music]
The Emerald Isle might be small in size.
It's less than 500 km long and home to a
population of only 7 million people. But
there are few places on Earth that have
a brand this strong.
[music]
Everyone wants a piece of it. [music]
There are 70 million people in the world
who claim to have Irish heritage, uh, of
which I am one. And that is a staggering
number, especially when you think about
the population itself being so tiny.
So, what is it about Irishness that is
so appealing to so many people? And
actually,
what is Irish identity? What does it
mean to be Irish?
The story of Irish identity has been
shaped by centuries of conflict. And
it's still far from straightforward. For
hundreds of years, the island was ruled
by the British. And the legacy of that
is that it's now divided in two.
Northern Ireland, which is part of the
United Kingdom, and the independent
Republic of Ireland, where I'm starting
my journey.
I have come to the county of Offley and
the small town of Talammore, famous for
its whiskey and some other excellent
exports. It's not the most obvious place
to start a journey in Ireland, but Talo
is my ancestral home. This is where my
mom was born and grew up. And it's also
where I spent all of my summers as a
child.
>> Oh my goodness me. Hannah, you are so
well.
>> How are you?
>> Like this.
>> Lovely to see you.
>> Great to see you.
>> How you doing? [laughter]
>> It does. I know. Exactly. On the rope
swing especially. Yeah. [laughter]
This farm has been in my family for
generations and my cousin Donal is its
current [music] custodian.
Actually, the main thing I remember is
being covered in cow tongue and then
>> Yeah, when we've been in Milan.
>> Yeah, you [music] were wise to watching
the tails, right? [laughter]
>> I had not learned that lesson like
literally from head to toe completely
covered.
>> Yeah, absolutely. Yeah.
>> Hey girls, the cows were always lovely.
It was the bull that I was scared of.
>> Oh, here he is.
>> New cards ready. [laughter] I think
that's how I found out what happens, by
the way, by being here.
>> The same with my kids.
>> What's that bull doing, daddy?
>> Look, I'm not here to show off my
farming expertise. But if Irishness runs
in the blood, maybe mine has something
useful [music] to say.
>> Oh, yeah. That's
>> Oh my gosh.
So, now this is in the good room.
>> In the good room.
>> Yeah. The wallpaper has changed and the
curtains have changed.
>> Not much else.
>> It is really nice that the [music] same
house has been in the family for like
120 years or whatever.
>> This is my aunt Dimpner. Names don't
come much more Irish than that. And
she's been digging out the family
records going back to the 1940s.
>> Your grandmother was a priest
housekeeper before she got married. So,
she was in the habit of keeping records,
you know. So, everything was recorded
here.
>> Sold the pig. And how much did they get
for the pig? £16.
>> £16. That's quite a fancy pig.
[laughter]
>> And then sold a cow. £34.
>> Hang on. This is 47. So there must be my
mom's birth at some point here.
>> Good.
>> February, April, June. Here we go. Sold
four pigs. Bought two pigs.
>> Oh [snorts] yeah. And a baby was born.
[laughter]
>> And then back to the pigs.
>> Yeah.
>> That's Irish priorities for you.
Although to be fair to my granny,
[music] in the 1940s, Ireland was one of
the most rural places in Western Europe.
There is a deep connection to [music]
the land here. But to understand it, you
need to go back further. Before pigs,
before paperwork, because Irish identity
doesn't just live in stories, it's
written in our genes.
Couple of weeks ago, I did one of those
DNA tests that everyone has got so
excited about in the last few years
where where you spit into a little test
tube and it tells you where your DNA is
from. So, you get half of your genes
from your father and then another half
from your mother. Essentially, a random
selection and you're inheriting
everything about you. you know, your
your hair color, MC1 Argene, for what
it's worth, your your eye color, your
whether you you sneeze when you look at
a bright light.
And this now makes up a totally original
combination
of DNA, a totally unique person that has
never existed before and will never
exist again, i.e. you.
From the millions of people taking these
same tests, scientists have now built
this vast map of how DNA differs between
continents, [music] countries, and even
specific regions. And then when you send
in your sample, they can look for
familiar patterns to figure out where
your code fits. For instance, [music]
here there is a kind of interesting
little run of diamonds that appears.
If you know that you see that [music]
exact same sequence, that same little
run of diamonds in people who come from
a [music] particular area, well, that's
a very big hint that this [music] person
is descended from that region.
Historian Dr. Jennifer Doyle is here
with my results, which means this is
either my big Irish reveal or a very
awkward plot twist.
>> What do you think you are before we
start? Um, I mean, I would just say half
Irish, half English.
>> Okay, let's have a look.
Oh. Oh, wow. Okay. [music]
56% Irish. So then that means that my
dad must have been a bit Irish as well.
>> Yeah. It's roughly in line with your dad
having an Irish greatgrandparent.
[music]
>> Oh man, I wish my dad was still alive.
He would have loved this cuz he always
felt like the Englishman whenever he
came [music] to Ireland. But he was
Irish.
>> He had Irish. He had an Irish great-g
grandandmother.
>> Amazing.
>> But if we're blaming anyone for my red
hair, I reckon my mom's DNA has got some
explaining to do.
>> Oh my gosh, look how small that circle
is. [gasps]
No.
>> Yeah. So, your mother 100% Irish and
solidly more.
>> Okay. We've gone back uh three
generations, sometimes four generations
on your mother's family and they're all
just extremely tall.
>> This kind of super concentrated DNA is
more often found on tiny isolated
islands where people have little choice
but to stay put. What I find
extraordinary about this is this is sort
of telling you just how rural rural
Ireland was until very recently.
>> Very recently in Ireland before the
invention of the bicycle. People moved
no more than 6 to 10 miles during their
lifetime.
>> Wow.
>> And they found marriage partners in that
area. And some of them are on the land
for a very long time. They're on the
same plots of land. Jennifer's found
public records that show my family were
farming in Talmore at least as far back
as 1825.
>> Here we have Tom Gary.
>> Yeah.
>> Your great great great grandfather.
>> And he has 6 acres of land.
>> Mhm.
>> And this tells you the quality of the
land.
>> A third quality.
>> So third quality is they're not it's not
great for growing food.
But this wouldn't have been his only
problem. Tom Garry almost certainly
didn't own those six acres.
By this point in [music] the 1800s,
Ireland had been ruled by the English
for over 600 years, and most of the
country was [music] controlled by
AngloIrish landlords, many of them
living elsewhere.
It was a brutal struggle to survive and
many families turned to the potato, a
high yield, lowcost crop that could feed
a household.
But as potato [music] planting spread,
agricultural diversity diminished.
Ireland became a nation largely living
on [music] a single crop. And the stage
was set for a tragedy that still echoes
[music]
some two centuries later.
In 1845, a blight [music] arrived. A
fast-spreading fungal-like disease that
swept across the country, [music]
destroying the one crop that millions
relied on. The next year, the blight
returned and the [music] next. Over 8
years, more than a million Irish people
died. Entire villages were abandoned as
more than a million fled to Britain,
Canada, and the United States in search
of food and a better future. Before the
famine, the population in County was
146,000.
After the famine in 1851, it was
112,000.
>> This is just tens of thousands of people
just gone in this small area.
>> Yeah.
>> This is people dying or leaving
>> dying or moving both. So censuses don't
capture the details. They just tell you
the population difference.
>> I'll never know exactly what my family
went through during that time. But I do
know this. Tom [music] Garry's son
Michael survived.
>> So if you look here, Michael Garry,
>> his father had 6 acres in 1825. [music]
>> In 1854,
his holdings are 23 acres.
There's [music] empty fields and their
landlords are wanting people to take
over the holdings. [music] So there's a
move to create larger farms.
>> They stayed and survived, [music]
but life was far from easy.
There is continuing economic strife. So
people are still leaving and that goes
on right up [music] until around the
turn of the 20th century.
It was only after years of protest from
tenant [music] farmers that the British
government finally introduced schemes
allowing them to buy the land they
[music] worked. And in 1902, my
great-grandfather did just that. He
bought the farm.
But the population of the island, which
[music] dropped from around 8 million to
4 million, has never fully recovered.
[music] And with fewer people to drive
an industrial boom, Ireland stayed a
rural country long after much of Europe
had moved on.
There's something quite impactful about
understanding history through your
biology.
Finding out that my family have
inhabited the very same patch of earth
for hundreds of years.
Finding out that that we were one of the
the lucky ones who survived the the
horrors of the famine.
It was more emotional than I was
expecting it to be. For those who left,
Ireland became softer in the [music]
telling, an emerald aisle of music and
memories. But for those who stayed, it
had to be something else entirely.
>> [music]
>> A place you worked, endured, rebuilt.
Less myth, more mud. [music] And if you
want to understand that island, let me
take you to where it shows up in full
glorious color.
I've headed east to County Kildair to an
event that is a celebration of Ireland's
relationship with the land. The
Punchertown [music] Festival.
5 days of horse racing, 100,000 fans,
and some extremely sophisticated
mainroading.
Plenty of countries like horse racing.
But here's the thing. There are 26
racecourses across Ireland and more
thoroughbredads per person than anywhere
else in the world. That's not just a
hobby. That's an identity in full
gallop.
I mean, I can't really tell the
difference between a [music] a racehorse
special and an old nag to be honest with
you.
>> Ross, hey, how you doing? It's lovely to
meet you.
Ross OS has been training [music] horses
since he was a kid.
>> So, who's this?
>> This horse is a horse called Giant
Hastacks. He's a lovely character. He's
a He's a great uh a great attitude.
Horses are very like humans. They have
all the same characteristics. You have
happy horses, sad horses, grumpy horses.
We kind of train him accordingly cuz
it's so competitive in Ireland.
>> It is really competitive in Ireland
though, isn't it? Like why?
>> The horse is very much part of the
tradition of Ireland. He was all the
working horse at the time. you know, the
horse that pulled the cart and the horse
that pulled the plow.
The Irish people do have a great
affiliation with a horse. It's it's
passed [music] down through generations
and horse racing is very much part of
that. People went to race meetings
[music] to meet and chat and this
tradition has kept up.
>> I mean, there's lots of places that like
horse racing, but the Irish really I
mean, it's part of their national
identity [music] almost.
>> Yeah, very much so. And it's a thing
that that hopefully will last forever
because it would be very sad to lose it.
>> [music]
>> The Irish have taken their relationship
with the horse, once synonymous with
hard work and struggle, and turned it
into big business, [music]
and that is thanks in part to a very
clever strategy. When the Irish state
gained independence from the British in
[music] the 1920s, they encouraged horse
racing and showjumping, which were both
seen as a source of national [music]
pride. And in the 1940s, after taking
over the national stud [music] farm,
they invested in top quality breeding
programs, and they've been turning out
Irish winners ever since, including my
hot tip for today's [music] race, giant
hay stacks. I think he wins prettiest
horse. No, it's not part of the
competition, but [music] it should be.
The Irish government still supports the
industry, funding facilities, [music]
offering tax breaks, even prize money.
It now brings in over€2 [music] billion
euros into the economy every year. And
then of course there's the real national
sport.
>> Test
prices
>> betting on the outcome.
>> Hi, how are you? Well, he's definitely
our favorite, but I think it's worth a
bet all the same. Can I have giant hay
stacks?
>> Yeah, it's time.
>> Um, 10 each way.
>> 10 each way.
>> 10 each way. 21.
>> Thank you very much.
>> Thank you.
>> Over €80 million are bet at Irish race
courses every year.
And it's now time for my own investment
to perform. Giant hay stacks.
First race day two
>> 24 other horses 2 miles 10 hurdles
>> and giant h stacks leading up in front
was the first time
>> sitting at the front staying out of
trouble. Okay, if he wins €120,
but if he comes second, third, or
fourth, €30.
>> But on the uphill stretch, giant hay
sack starts to fade. And my winnings
with him
right in the back. Right at the back
place [music] that came in last,
>> wasn't it?
>> Well, that's my €20 to a good cause.
Somebody else's winnings. [laughter]
Tell you what I think is interesting
here. It isn't just the scale of it.
It's it's how something as old as
working the land has been reinvented as
a national strength.
And I have a suspicion there's something
more to it than just horses and
heritage.
By now you know that I love a little bit
of geology and I think that part of the
reason for island horse racing success
actually comes from the earth itself. So
two main things. First off Ireland has
these natural big open grasslands which
are absolutely perfect for racing horses
on. But also the dominant bedrock
beneath the soil is limestone. Limestone
comes up through the soil, which means
there is a lot of calcium in the grass.
Calcium excellent for bones, which is
exactly what you want if you're breeding
a nice strong thorbred.
I don't think it's just the horses
who've been shaped by Ireland's [music]
geology.
I have a theory that this landscape has
done more than just mold the land. It's
quietly chiseled the people, too.
[music]
>> [music]
>> I've come west to Donigaul Bay. Once
defined by tectonic shifts and now by
the pursuit of flattering selfie angles.
Look at that. But beyond the insta
worthy views.
>> Incredible. This place tells a story
about Ireland before the history books
began. [music]
So about 250 million years ago, the
Americas and Europe were part of [music]
this one massive connected landmass with
with what is now island sitting right
between [music] the two. And then over
time, these unimaginable tectonic forces
ripped those continents apart with the
Atlantic Ocean swelling in to fill the
gap [music] between them. And that
really left Ireland right on the
precipice of Europe, the continent
[music] on one side and then this vast
ocean on the other and that shaped
[music] life itself here.
Long before the saints and sermons
arrived, Ireland [music] had its own
mythology.
In a lot of ancient coastal communities,
the sea is a [music] great source of
mystery, and here is no different.
The Irish believed that across or
beneath the waves [music]
lay Tenorg, the land of eternal youth.
There in the other world lived the
Aashi,
a supernatural race of fairies descended
from the gods of Irish mythology. And in
a landscape like this, you can see why
people believed them.
island has these these really strange
geological features like these bridges
that are kind of carved into the rock.
We know what causes this. It's the
erosion from from the violence of the
Atlantic. It kind of comes up along this
coastline, smashes against it over and
over across millions of years, first
forming a bit of a cave and then finally
breaching through the back wall of the
cave, leaving this bridge-like
structure.
Hundreds of years ago, people took
geological structures like this as real
evidence that there was this other
parallel world that was inhabited
[music] by fairies and and other
mythical beings. But they weren't like
cute, lovely little fairies to sort of
magic dust and sparkle. These were like
mean, nasty fairies, right? And these
bridges [music] are the way that they
can travel between our world and theirs.
Telling these stories passed from one
generation to next became an enduring
Irish tradition.
But like so many myths, they probably
existed for a reason. Perhaps as a
warning. The sea could provide, but it
could also take.
But you have to imagine that most of the
year this place will have like these
violent Atlantic waves kind of crashing
up against us.
I think that would really add to this
ominous feeling that you would [music]
have about this place.
If ancient mythology draws on a fear of
the sea, there are some people who seem
to have missed [music] the memo.
I've come to Ross Nala Beach.
>> It's often like this.
>> No, definitely not. to meet Britain, a
marine social scientist, surfer and
someone suspiciously relaxed about cold
water.
>> I think in Ireland we have an
interesting relationship with the sea.
You know, historically a lot of villages
would have, you know, lost a lot of
people who were fishing. Kind of the
sentiment was better not to learn how to
swim at all so that if the boat went
down, they'd go quicker rather than
prolonging the inevitable. The stories
like that.
>> Wow.
If the sea once meant danger and
departure, it's starting to mean
something else.
>> Is that you?
>> Yeah.
>> That's here.
That's the biggest wave I've ever
surfed.
>> That's absolutely unreal.
>> I mean, I wouldn't necessarily associate
island with surfing.
>> No, to be fair, I don't think most
people would, but we'll have some of the
biggest waves in the world. It's all
down, at least in part, to Ireland's
position on the map.
>> There's nothing between Ireland and the
storm system that gets formed typically
between Greenland and Iceland. You just
get really big storm systems that have a
lot of energy. And then these [music]
energy waves are quite literally
rippling out as the wind blows over this
expansive ocean. And the first place
they're going to hit will be here.
>> [music]
>> It's not just what's above the surface
that shapes the waves. Under the water,
most of the West Coast is fringed by
reefs stretching miles along the
coastline.
But [music] in places those reefs just
disappear, which as it turns out is
excellent news for surfers. Here you
have the limestone reefs and mountains
uh that then create what we call slabs
of reef that shelve into the water.
>> Cliff edges underwater.
>> Yeah. Yes. [laughter]
>> When a [music] wave hits the near
vertical rock shelf or slab, its base
gets stopped in its tracks, but the top
keeps on going. The energy has nowhere
to go but up. And so the wave keeps
charging forwards until gravity does the
rest. that [music] will create then a
more like dramatic wave with that kind
of classic cylindrical shape and you can
pull inside almost into the belly of the
wave for a few seconds. The peak surf
experience. So you get a lot of
traveling surfers especially coming
looking specifically for the big waves.
For this isn't just about sport. It's
about rethinking a relationship that has
always been a bit stormy.
>> It's wonderful to see the shift
happening. You know, you've got water
safety classes on local beaches
everywhere all summer long. You know,
the kids are then learning how to
connect with the ocean. That's why
surfing is so great because it it's like
a playful introduction. Uh it breaks
down that fear.
Now look, I've got Talammore in my
blood. Landlocked, bogbound, deeply
unbrezy. So naturally, that makes me
perfect test subject.
We won't go out very far. The waves are
really fun, gentle. Let the surfing
commence.
I want to evoke that beautiful video
that you showed me earlier of elegance
and in control. But I think it is going
to be more like trying to shove a
beached whale into a water. [laughter]
>> And this is it. All right.
Should
I do an 81? Yeah. Yeah, let's do an 81.
Wow.
Yeah, that was a great one.
Yeah.
There you go. That's it. Amazing.
>> I mean, I wouldn't say that the ocean
was my natural habitat, but I actually
enjoyed that quite a lot more than I
thought. And while I was out there, I
was thinking there is a bit of a theme
that's emerging here between all of the
different places I've been.
Ireland's got this this really painful
past, right? That the famine, the
economic migration, and now the the
violence of the ocean. But the Irish
have this real knack of of rising above
things, of of of rebuilding. It's like
they don't let things leave an indelible
mark on them.
>> Turns out being hard to define is a
pretty effective [music] survival
strategy.
>> Hello, dear ditch.
>> Gitch.
>> Hello, deod.
>> Dear ditch,
>> welcome.
>> Fulture,
>> welcome vulture. Vulture.
>> Thank you.
>> Aagen
sort of feel like [music] I'm just
saying train in a Northern Irish accent.
>> Trian.
[music]
>> One way the British asserted control
over Ireland was by trying to erase its
culture. And I think the most potent
example of this is the Irish language
itself. At one point, this was the
language that was spoken by people on
the island of Ireland. But under English
rule, they really tried to suppress
Irish, tried to associate [music] it
with with kind of poor and rural
communities. Um, instead, English was
the language of government. It was the
the language of education. Uh, and in
the 1830s, all of the the British run
schools switched to teaching purely in
English.
And it worked. By [music] 1900, less
than 20% of Irish people were fluent in
their native tongue. Some people [music]
think that the Irish language could have
disappeared completely if it wasn't for
this guy here. This is Father Eugene
Agrroni. And he started publishing these
little lessons in Irish in a weekly
paper called the Weekly Freeman. And as
a result, the Irish language became this
this small symbol of resistance.
A groon helped make the Irish [music]
language a cause and plenty of people
still see it that way.
>> My name is Paul. It's Anam Paul.
>> It's Anam Don Hannah.
Around 40% of the population in the
Republic of Ireland can now [music]
speak some Irish. But the language
itself isn't just a means of
communication. [music] It's a living
record of how this country has seen the
world, handed down verb by verb. For
instance, Irish doesn't have a word for
no. Uh, also doesn't have a word for
yes, except that sometimes people will
take a sharp intake of breath to signify
that's what they mean. Like, will you
have a cup of tea? It's called an
ingressive affirmative. Uh, it's very
few countries have it, but it is a
recognized part of the the linguistic
culture of Ireland. And if you want to
use words to sort of say yes or no, you
have to really pay attention to what's
being said. Will you have a cup of tea?
I will. Uh, did you see him? I did. It
kind of prolongs the conversation. Makes
Irish people more amanable to chatter.
But I think most interesting of all is
when you look at how Irish people say I
am, the verb to be. Because in Irish
there are two different verbs for it. If
you're talking about something inherent
like I am Irish, then [music] you use
the word is. Is no is I am Irish. But on
the other hand, if you are talking about
something that's temporary like I am
cold or I am sad or I am hungry, then
[music] you use the word ta tabum is I'm
sad and that literally translates
[music] to sadness is is around me or
sadness is on me. And I think that sort
of implies that like the sadness doesn't
[music] define you, right? It's
something that passes. And I think that
gives us this big clue about how Irish
people see themselves.
But of course, not everyone born here
sees the Irish story in the same way.
The weight of history lands differently
depending on where you are. And there's
one part of the island where that
difference isn't just felt, it's also
lived.
In 1922, [music] after more than 700
years of British rule and decades of
violent clashes, Ireland was granted its
independence. albeit not in its
entirety.
26 of Ireland's 32 counties became a new
state [music] that was predominantly
Catholic. This would become the Republic
of Ireland. While in the north, where
the population [music] was largely
Protestant, six counties remained part
of the United Kingdom and became known
as Northern Ireland. But this
arrangement was contested from the very
beginning.
[music]
In Northern Ireland, the Catholic
minority faced systemic discrimination
in housing, employment, and local voting
rights. Many supported a united Ireland,
while most Protestants wanted a
continued union with Britain.
By 1969, these deep tensions between
communities spilled into [music]
violence.
>> Just to your left, you will see a peace
wall.
>> Wow. Stanton over 40t high.
>> Oh my gosh. There's no going over that,
is there?
>> Originally put up in 1969 by the British
Army to keep the two sides apart.
Over
the next 30 years, what began as civil
unrest escalated into armed conflict
between Catholic Republican groups like
the IRA,
Protestant loyalist paramilitaries like
the UVF and the British army who had
originally been brought in to keep the
peace. They called it the troubles, a
conflict that took thousands of lives
and left lasting scars on both sides.
In 1998, the Good Friday Agreement
brought a fragile peace,
>> reaching out the hand of friendship
>> with promises of disarmament, power
[music] sharing, and a new political
future.
>> God bless all the people of Northern
Ireland.
>> Since then, the violence has faded, but
in Belfast, the past is never far away.
And for black cab driver and tour guide
Michael, who grew up here, the story is
personal.
You're in no doubt as to what part of
the city you're in, you'll find a lot of
the Union Jacks up.
>> Wow. Oh my god, they're everywhere.
>> You know what's really strange? You do
not see this number of flags in England
itself.
>> No.
>> It [music] still feels like there's this
real sense of is it patriotism? Is it
like resistance? What is it?
>> It's very much so. If you live over in
this side, you'll consider yourself to
be British. They will stand for God save
the king. Yet when we go over to the
Catholic side, most carry an Irish
passport and their national anthem will
be around the vein. Only 400 yd apart,
yet two totally different nationalities.
>> Yeah.
>> That's what the whole war was about.
Those that wanted to remain part of
Britain and those that wanted an all
Ireland that wanted the six counties of
the north repatriated. So this tension
is drawn on religious lines but isn't
about religion.
>> Exactly.
>> It's about identity.
>> Identity. Identity or culture.
>> The first peace wall built in 1969
[music]
was meant to be temporary. But over the
decades, some 20 m of walls were built
to [music] minimize violence on both
sides.
We're not even the Catholic side. This
is the wall here.
You can see how close it is to people's
houses
and the cages, the back of the houses.
>> So, what would people [music] throw
stuff?
>> There'll be petrol bombs, bricks,
bottles.
>> Oh my god.
>> And just to protect your property, you
would have something like this along the
back.
>> For visitors to Belfast, the wall feels
like a [music] relic of its difficult
past. But for the people who live beside
it, it's something much more personal.
We knocked on one of the doors
just [music] just on the off chance and
they'd let us have a look. Hi.
>> Hi.
>> Oh, it smells good.
>> Oh my gosh, it's beautiful out here.
What a clever way to make it less
imposing. Does it bother you the cage?
>> No,
>> not at all. Don't notice it?
>> No.
>> She didn't want to be filmed,
unfortunately. [music]
But this woman, she's lived here since
1972.
She raised her children here. Had had
her babies asleep in the house
while people were throwing [music]
petrol bombs over this wall. She said
that to her this wall was like a real
symbol of security. It [music] was like
safety. It meant that she could live in
her house and actually have it as a home
for her and her family rather than it
being this kind of oppressive thing.
It doesn't feel like these walls aren't
necessarily a remnant of trouble's past.
>> There have been calls a lot of time for
the wall to be taken down.
>> But unfortunately the politicians here
do want to be held responsible just in
case something happens
>> right if the wall comes down and
fighting restarts.
>> Not so much fighting the way it was
but maybe skirmishes. There's still a
divide where some people won't let go of
the past, but for the next generation,
we're going to have to. [music]
>> And do you think they are?
>> Yes. Young people today.
>> Totally different from young people when
I was growing up.
>> Really?
>> Cuz young people today don't worry about
religion. Don't worry about a divide.
[music]
>> The influence of religion in Northern
Ireland seems to be waning. And some
statistics do suggest young people are
moving away from the politics of the
past.
This is an island that has always found
new ways to define itself. And my final
[music] destination might be the boldest
example of that yet.
[music]
I'm heading to the east side of Dublin
where the Grand Canal meets the sea.
30 years ago, all of this was just a
disused dockyard. You had rusty cranes,
empty warehouses. Ireland's economy was
was really struggling. There was massive
unemployment. Young people were leaving
in their droves to try and find jobs
elsewhere. And then the government
decided to take a massive gamble, which
wasn't uncontroversial at the time. They
slashed the corporate tax rate to 12 and
a half% which is way lower than you find
in other developed countries. And it
worked. That tax cut along with a suite
of generous incentives turned a few
heads among some key [music] global
players. And soon the multinationals
came. Tech giants, finance firms, all
wanting a foothold in Ireland. And with
them came jobs, wealth, and a brand new
skyline.
>> Of course, it helped the island had this
young English-speaking, well-educated
population.
This area became [music] known as the
Silicon Docks. And by 2024, Ireland's
GDP was among the highest per capita in
the world. Although, like so many things
here, there [music] is a twist.
>> Hi, can I have a Guinness?
>> Thank you.
This bite here represents Ireland's GDP.
It's nice and full, almost overflowing.
GDP, however, is slightly distorted by
the presence of those big global
players. A lot of that money flows out
of the country
back to the big multinational
headquarters and what's left is known as
the GNI, which is the gross national
income. Now, this is the bit that stays
in the country. This is often seen as a
better measure of Ireland's actual
economy, and it can be down by up to a
third, which means quite a lot of this
that I've got to drink. Bear with me.
[music]
So, Ireland's economic picture might be
a bit more complicated than it first
seems, but be under no doubt, this is a
country that has completely transformed
in a few decades.
It's easy to tell the story of Ireland
through its economy, how it's [music]
changed, what was rebuilt, what's
booming now.
But I think traveling around the country
has changed how I see Irish
>> [music]
>> identity. And I have a theory that I'm
going to test out at the most Irish
place imaginable, a storytelling night
run by Kieran Gaffia.
>> Hello, Dublin. How are we all doing?
[cheering]
Welcome to Shanakiha. The theme tonight
is identity and it's an absolute banger
of a theme.
>> Why do Irish people have such an
affinity with storytelling?
>> We were largely illiterate for hundreds
and hundreds and years, particularly in
the rural parts of Ireland. So the only
way of accessing folklore or literature
was through gathering in a room and
listening to a shanai, which is the
Irish word for storyteller. That would
be how we'd exchange ideas, listen to
stories, pass those stories down through
the generations, and that's kind of why
Irish people have this gravitational
pull towards storytelling.
>> I mean, Irish have a reputation for
being quite good at it as well.
>> Yeah, we do. I think there's a real
encouragement to be creative and to
inject a little bit of humor into your
story and to make light out of it.
>> So, who am I? I am the eldest daughter,
the responsible one, and my boyfriend
might even sometimes say the dictator
who's always giving him jobs,
though I prefer benevolent ruler.
>> People say that there's no better party
to go to than an Irish funeral because
we have a way of just I guess coming
together and celebrating. And it's a way
of coping. I think it's a coping
mechanism.
>> One of them said to me, "Oh, were you
Irish before you fainted?" And I said,
"No, I woke up with the accent."
And my sister said, "She's still
sarcastic. She's fine."
[applause]
Like, you have a massive bill of us for
Hannah Fry.
[applause]
>> Hello everybody. Uh, so my name is
Hannah Fry and as you can tell from my
accent, I'm Irish. Um, okay. The voice
the voice might be English, but um, the
passport Oh, yeah.
I'm very aware of the irony of me
standing here talking to an Irish
audience about what it means to be
Irish. But I think that Irishness isn't
just a collection of stories about the
past or a feeling or a birthright. I
think that it's this active present
tense way of being. I think, you know,
of course, this is a country with such a
painful past, but somehow or other, all
of those things, they didn't stick. They
didn't become the thing that Irish
people have used to define themselves. I
wonder whether that's what allows
Ireland to to keep on reinventing itself
with optimism.
[applause]
[music]
This this whole thing has been about
Irishness, right? And okay, of course,
traditions a part of that and history is
part of it.
But I think the thing that has really
forged Irish identity has been the way
that they respond to pain. I mean, you
really see this in the language. You you
see it in the humor. And I think you see
it in their approach to reinvention as
well.
And if you to try and distill it down to
to one thing, I think it's this idea,
this deep belief
that what happens to you is not the same
as who you are.
>> [music]